### Memcache

In a multi-web-server environment, Memcache allows two or more web-servers to share a virtual pool of memory to which data can be stored. This data can be Ruby objects, core data types, file resources, results of data base queries, rendered snippets of html pages, etc. The power of Memcache is two-fold: it allows us to store data in memory, allowing application logic to access the requested data without the penalty of a disk IO operation, and its ability to "farm" different web-servers together to form a virtual pool of memory allows us to utilize otherwise wasted memory resources on web-servers that have memory resources to share.

This translates into two substantial benefits in terms of performance and cost. Queries that are expensive, or expensive processes generating results that block or require a large number of cycles become quick and painless after the first request is added to memcache. Smaller performance gains can be had by adding caching to various parts of the application (typically for those parts of the application that represent the highest load in terms of requests). This allows the request / response cycle to be reduced, allowing more modest machines to be able to handle a larger overall volume of requests per unit of time. In the case that this performance savings allows a business to run a web application on an Amazon m3.medium rather than a m3.large, the financial savings are significant.

Memcache is essentially a distributed in-memory hash. Via a memcache connection, I can specify the key I want memcache to store some data with. The memcache hashing algorithm elects which web-server to store my data in. When I request to get that data, a request is sent out to each server sharing in the memcache virtual memory pool. There is no master / replica notion in memcache, the term "cluster" is misleading for memcache configurations.
